SOURCE: https://santa-ana.gov/santa-ana-city-council-continues-to-strengthen-tenant-protections-by-banning-anticompetitive-rent-setting-software/
RETRIEVED: 2026-10-03 22:34 UTC
CAPTURED_VIA: curl (single page) + html.parser text extraction; gold-set capture by Claude (lawyer_review_02 D088+)
SOURCE_TYPE: official

Santa Ana City Council continues to strengthen tenant protections by banning anticompetitive rent-setting software - City of Santa Ana
Skip to content
Skip to navigation
Site map
 Official government website 
Action toolbar
 Payments
 Report Issue
 Translate
 Translate language select
 Search
 City of Santa Ana
 Menu
Primary menu links
Services
Residents
Businesses
Departments
Events
News
Visit
Know Your Rights
 City of Santa Ana
Extreme Heat Warning
The National Weather Service has issued an Extreme Heat Warning from 10 a.m. Oct. 2 to 8 p.m. Oct. 8. Learn more
Santa Ana City Council continues to strengthen tenant protections by banning anticompetitive rent-setting software
Posted on March 5, 2026
The Santa Ana City Council took another step to protect renters by passing a new ordinance banning rent-setting computer software that can artificially inflate rents.
The ordinance, which was approved on March 3, 2026 for a second reading and final vote, prohibits the sale, licensing, provision and use of certain algorithmic rent-setting software for residential rental properties.
It addresses the growing use of algorithmic devices that set rental rates in the private housing market using nonpublic competitor data, including real-time rents, lease renewals and occupancy levels.
The new ordinance is limited to residential rental property and does not apply to pricing software that relies solely on publicly available data, aggregate historical data, or tools used to comply with affordable housing program requirements.
It is structured to operate alongside existing and proposed state antitrust laws while providing stronger local protections, as it:
Defines a limited scope, covering residential rental property within Santa Ana city limits;
Provides tenants with direct enforcement authority through civil action; and
Eases the burden of proof for tenants by only needing to prove the landlord is using prohibited technology, instead of having to prove there was intentional collusion by the landlord.
Under the ordinance, a tenant affected by a violation may seek injunctive relief, damages, or civil penalties of up to $1,000 per violation, plus attorney’s fees.
Recent news
COSAS Newsletter: October 2, 2026
Posted on October 2, 2026
City cooling centers available during high heat
Posted on October 1, 2026
Neal Machander Tennis Center hours of operation
Posted on October 1, 2026
Rent Stabilization Newsletter: September 2026
Posted on September 30, 2026
Take our Community Priorities Survey to share which City services and programs are most important to you
Posted on September 28, 2026
All news »
 Helpful
 Share
 Facebook
 Twitter
 Email
 Size
 +
 Reset
 a
 −
Engage
About
Social media
Subscribe
Website feedback
Careers
Apply for a job
Apply for an internship
Frequently asked questions
Get notified about new jobs
Help
Services
Report an issue
Who do I call?
Accessibility
Sitemap
Transparency
City budget
Financial reports
OpenBook financial data
Economic development subsidy reports
Public records portal
Public records requests
Contact us
Santa Ana City Hall
20 Civic Center Plaza
Santa Ana, CA 92701
(714) 647-5400
Get directions to City Hall
 Powered by 
This content is for decoration only skip decoration.
 Close window
 Search Site
 Search
 Close window