SOURCE: https://www.boston.gov/sites/default/files/file/2021/03/Housing%20Stability%20Notification%20Act.pdf
RETRIEVED: 2026-10-03T22:34Z
VERIFIED_BY: Hamza (lawyer review 2026-10-04) / AI-draft registration
SHA256: 98c4ab3841abe2caf674bcb3b6d35e46de64bb1a41bbeb61d100ab98c13b33ba
NOTE: team supplementary capture D090. Source type: official. Publisher: City of Boston. team capture (curl + pdftotext)
---- BEGIN TEXT ----
SOURCE: https://www.boston.gov/sites/default/files/file/2021/03/Housing%20Stability%20Notification%20Act.pdf
RETRIEVED: 2026-10-03 22:34 UTC
CAPTURED_VIA: curl (single page) + pdftotext -layout; gold-set capture by Claude (lawyer_review_02 D088+)
SOURCE_TYPE: official

                               CITY OF BOSTON
                                    IN CITY COUNCIL




AN ORDINANCE CONCERNING HOUSING STABILITY, REQUIRING NOTICE TO
TENANTS AND FORMER HOMEOWNERS OF RIGHTS AND RESOURCES

Be it ordained by the City Council of Boston, as follows:

SECTION 1.

City of Boston Code, Ordinances, Chapter X is hereby amended by inserting the
following Section after Section 10-10: -

10-11. HOUSING STABILITY NOTIFICATION ACT

10-11.1      Purpose

The purpose of this Ordinance is to promote the housing stability of Boston residents.

10-11.2      Definitions

When used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms
shall have the following meanings:

      "Applicable laws" means all controlling applicable federal, state and local
      statutes, regulations, ordinances and administrative rules and orders that have
      the effect of law, as well as all applicable final, non-appealable judicial opinions.

      "Entity" means a business organization, or any other kind of organization,
      including without limitation a corporation, partnership, trust, limited liability
      corporation, limited liability partnership, joint venture, sole proprietorship,
      development or project, or any other category of organization, and any
      employee, agent, servant or other representative of such entity.

      "Former Homeowner" means any natural person or group of natural persons
      who, prior to foreclosure of a housing accommodation, had been the title owner
      or owners of such housing accommodation, or who has a legal or beneficial
interest in the housing accommodation by dissolution of marriage, separation
agreement, survivorship, devise, or intestate succession, and who at the time of
foreclosure actually occupied such housing accommodation as a resident or
residents.

"Foreclosing Owner" means any natural person or entity that holds title in any
capacity, directly or indirectly without limitation, whether in its own name, as
trustee or as beneficiary, to a housing accommodation that has been foreclosed
upon and either (1) held or owned a mortgage or other security interest in the
housing accommodation at any point prior to the foreclosure of the housing
accommodation, or is the subsidiary, parent, trustee, or agent thereof; or (2) is an
institutional mortgagee that acquires or holds title to the housing accommodation;
or (3) is the Federal National Mortgage Association or the Federal Home Loan
Mortgage Corporation.

"Landlord" means owner of record, or lessor or sub-lessor of an owner of record,
or any other person, project, housing development, or other entity entitled either
to receive rent for the use and occupancy of any rental unit or to maintain an
action for possession of a rental unit, or an agent, representative, successor, or
assignee of any of the foregoing.

"Lease non-renewal or expiration" means a provision in a written rental
agreement for a housing accommodation or rental unit that the lease will expire
either as of a fixed date, or at the election of the owner for the failure of the
tenant to take certain affirmative action.

"Notice to quit" means any written notice sent by a landlord or a foreclosing
owner to a tenant or former homeowner of a residential rental unit or housing
accommodation seeking to terminate the tenant's tenancy or the former
homeowner's occupancy of such rental unit or housing accommodation.

"Office of Housing Stability" means the office of the City of Boston created to
address the problem of displacement in the city, or any subsequent or successor
office or entity similarly empowered with like purpose or responsibility, or if no
such office exists, the city office or entity with the closest corresponding purpose
or responsibility.

"Owner" means any person or entity that holds title to one or more dwelling units
in any manner including but not limited to a partnership, corporation or trust. For
purposes of this ordinance the term "owner" shall include one who manages,
       controls, or customarily accepts rent on behalf of the owner.

       "Property" means a parcel of land along with all fixtures, structures and
       improvements thereupon, located in the City of Boston, that is assessed and
       taxed as an undivided whole.

       "Rental Unit" means a non-owner occupied room or group of related rooms within
       a dwelling used or intended for use by one family or household for living,
       sleeping, cooking and eating.

       "Skilled Nursing Facility" means a health facility or a distinct part of a hospital that
       provides, at a minimum, skilled nursing care and supportive care to patients
       whose primary medical need is the availability of skilled nursing care on an
       extended basis. Such facility must provide 24 hour inpatient care, an activity
       program, and medical, nursing, dietary, and pharmaceutical services.
       Additionally, the facility must provide effective arrangements, confirmed in
       writing, through which services required by the patients but not regularly provided
       within the facility can be obtained promptly when needed.

       "Tenancy" means occupation or use of a dwelling unit under an express or
       implied rental agreement.

       "Tenant" means any person who inhabits or is entitled to inhabit a dwelling
       unit under a rental agreement.

10-11.3              Applicability

The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to all rental units and housing
accommodations in the City of Boston, in whole or in part, where a notice to quit or
other notice of lease nonrenewal or expiration has been served, or should have been
served, on the tenant or former homeowner of any such rental unit or housing
accommodation as of the effective date of this ordinance, but where any such rental
unit or housing accommodation has not yet been vacated or a final order of judgment
for possession has not entered as of the effective date of this ordinance. However, the
provisions of this ordinance shall not apply to the following types of units: (1) Rental
units in any hospital, skilled nursing facility or health facility; and (2) Rental units in a
nonprofit facility that has the primary purpose of providing short term treatment,
assistance or therapy for alcohol, drug or other substance abuse. Short term treatment
is treatment meant to last thirty or fewer days where such housing is incidental to the
recovery program and where the client has been informed in writing of the short term,
temporary or transitional nature of the housing at its inception,

10-11.4              Required Notice

When a landlord or foreclosing owner serves the tenant or former homeowners any
notice to quit or notice of lease nonrenewal or expiration, such landlord or foreclosing
owner shall, at the same time, also serve a copy of said notice to quit or notice of
lease nonrenewal or expiration on the City of Boston's Office of Housing Stability. All
notice to quit or notice of lease nonrenewal or expiration to tenant or former
homeowners shall also include a notice of basic housing rights and resources,
containing a list of organizations available to assist tenants and​/​or former homeowners
with their contact information on a form or forms prepared by the City of Boston's
Office of Housing Stability, which shall be attached thereto. Where a landlord or
foreclosing owner is exercising a right of lease nonrenewal or expiration, the owner
shall give such written notice prepared by the City of Boston's Office of Housing
Stability to the tenant at least thirty days prior to commencing any summary process
action against the tenant or former homeowner. Such notice shall be provided in-hand
or by certified mail and electronic mail.

Not withstanding G. L. c. 4, § 7 (26) (c) and the privacy rights therein, a tenant may
allow the city to disclose the tenant's information to a public advocacy organization.

10-11.5              Non-Waivability

The provisions of this Ordinance may not be waived, and any term of any lease,
contract or other agreement which purports to waive or limit a tenant's or former
homeowner's substantive or procedural rights under this ordinance is contrary to
public policy, unenforceable, and void.

10-11.6              Partial Invalidity

If any provision of this ordinance or application thereof is held to be invalid or in conflict
with applicable laws, this invalidity or conflict shall not affect other provisions or
applications of this ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or
applications, and to this end, the provisions and applications of this ordinance are
severable.

10-11.7       Enforcement
The provisions of this Ordinance shall be reported to and investigated by the City of Boston's
Office of Fair Housing and Equity and enforced by the Commissioner of Inspectional Services,
and their duly authorized agents, officers and employees, by a noncriminal disposition pursuant
to Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40 Section 21D, and if applicable, by seeking to
restrain a violation by injunction. Each failure to comply with the requirements set forth in this
Ordinance with respect to an individual tenant or occupant entitled to notice hereunder shall be
deemed a separate offense triggering a separate warning or a fine of up to three hundred
dollars ($300) per day. Unless otherwise provided, a person or entity violating any provisions of
this Ordinance shall be warned or fined in accordance with the provisions of the City of Boston
Ordinances and/or Boston City Charter. The City may allocate fines collected for violations of
this ordinance for rent relief. The provisions of this section may also be enforced according to
M.G.L. Chapter 40U as accepted by the City of Boston, also known as the “Green Ticket” law.

Within ten days the City of Boston shall petition the Boston Public Health Commission
and the Boston Board of Health to promulgate regulations to prevent or discourage
eviction actions during the COVID-19 pandemic by preventing the coerced entry into a
unit by a sheriff, constable or other party, forcible removal of tenants and their
belongings, and other such actions that would incur or exacerbate public health risk.


SECTION 2.

The provisions of this ordinance shall become effective immediately.


Filed in Council: October 21, 2020

---- END TEXT ----
