SOURCE: https://codes.findlaw.com/ma/part-i-administration-of-the-government-ch-1-182/ma-gen-laws-ch-6-sect-172/
RETRIEVED: 2026-10-04
VERIFIED_BY: Hamza (lawyer review 2026-10-04) / AI-draft registration
SHA256: 794cdd2f94839881f83220069e08cdf119f4889c1e7980e5a8181174b29f9e41
NOTE: copy of sources/manual/MA-SCRN-02_MGL_c6_s172_findlaw.txt (pdftotext of the manual PDF). Source type: secondary-news. Publisher: FindLaw (mirror). official malegislature.gov page timed out twice on 2026-10-03
---- BEGIN TEXT ----
SOURCE: https://codes.findlaw.com/ma/part-i-administration-of-the-government-ch-1-182/ma-gen-laws-ch-6-sect-172/ (mirror of M.G.L. c.6 s.172; official: https://malegislature.gov/Laws/GeneralLaws/PartI/TitleII/Chapter6/Section172)
RETRIEVED: 2026-10-04 (saved by Hamza from his browser; single page)
CAPTURED_VIA: manual download, converted with pdftotext
SOURCE_TYPE: secondary mirror of statute
NOTE: FindLaw page 'Current as of January 01, 2025'

                    Find a         Legal               Learn                 Legal
                                                                                                   Blogs
                    Lawyer         Forms &             About          Professionals                        
                                   Services           the Law


CODES   /   MASSACHUSETTS   /   PART I. ADMINISTRATION OF THE GOVERNMENT (CH. 1-182)   /   CH. 6, § 172




Massachusetts General Laws Part I. Administration of the
Government (Ch. 1-182) Ch. 6, § 172
Current as of January 01, 2025 | Updated by Findlaw Staff

(a) The department shall maintain criminal offender record information in a database, which shall
exist in an electronic format and be accessible via the world wide web. Except as provided
otherwise in this chapter, access to the database shall be limited as follows:

(1) Criminal justice agencies may obtain all criminal offender record information, including sealed
records, for the actual performance of their criminal justice duties. Licensing authorities, as
defined in section 121 of chapter 140, may obtain all criminal offender record information,
including sealed records, for the purpose of firearms licensing in accordance with sections 121
to 131P, inclusive, of chapter 140. The criminal record review board may obtain all criminal
offender record information, including sealed records, for the actual performance of its duties.

(2) A requestor authorized or required by statute, regulation or accreditation requirement to
obtain criminal offender record information other than that available under clause (3) may obtain
such information to the extent and for the purposes authorized to comply with said statute,
regulation or accreditation requirement.

(3) A requestor or the requestor's legally designated representative may obtain criminal offender
record information for any of the following purposes: (i) to evaluate current and prospective
employees including full-time, part-time, contract, internship employees or volunteers; (ii) to
evaluate applicants for rental or lease of housing; (iii) to evaluate volunteers for services; and (iv)
to evaluate applicants for a professional or occupational license issued by a state or municipal
entity. Criminal offender record information made available under this section shall be limited to
the following: (i) felony convictions or findings of not guilty by reason of insanity for 10 years
following the disposition thereof, including termination of any period of incarceration or custody,
(ii) misdemeanor convictions for 5 years following the disposition thereof, including termination
of any period of incarceration or custody, and (iii) pending criminal charges, which shall include
cases that have been continued without a finding until such time as the case is dismissed
pursuant to section 18 of chapter 278; provided, however, that prior misdemeanor and felony
conviction records shall be available for the entire period that the subject's last available
conviction record is available under this section; and provided further, that a violation of section
7 of chapter 209A and a violation of section 9 of chapter 258E shall be treated as a felony for
purposes of this section.

(4) Any member of the general public may upon written request to the department and in
accordance with regulations established by the department obtain the following criminal
offender record information on a subject: (i) convictions or findings of not guilty by reason of
insanity for any felony punishable by a term of imprisonment of 5 years or more, for 10 years
following the disposition thereof, including termination of any period of incarceration or custody;
(ii) information indicating custody status and placement within the correction system for an
individual who has been convicted of any offense and sentenced to any term of imprisonment,
and at the time of the request: is serving a sentence of probation or incarceration, or is under
the custody of the parole board; (iii) felony convictions or findings of not guilty by reason of
insanity for 2 years following the disposition thereof, including any period of incarceration or
custody; and (iv) misdemeanor convictions for 1 year following the disposition thereof, including
any period of incarceration or custody.

(5) A subject who seeks to obtain his own criminal offender record information and the subject's
legally designated representative may obtain all criminal offender record information from the
department pertaining to the subject under section 175.

(6) The commissioner may provide access to criminal offender record information to persons
other than those entitled to obtain access under this section, if the commissioner finds that such
dissemination to such requestor serves the public interest. Upon such a finding, the
commissioner shall also determine the extent of access to criminal offender record information
necessary to sustain the public interest. The commissioner shall make an annual report to the
governor and file a copy of the report with the state secretary, the attorney general, the clerk of
the house of representatives and the clerk of the senate documenting all access provided under
this paragraph, without inclusion of identifying data on a subject. The annual report shall be
available to the public upon request.

(7) Housing authorities operating pursuant to chapter 121B may obtain from the department
conviction and pending criminal offender record information for the sole purpose of evaluating
applications for housing owned by such housing authority, in order to further the protection and
well-being of tenants of such housing authorities.
(8) The department of telecommunications and cable and the department of public utilities may
obtain from the department all available criminal offender record information for the purpose of
screening applicants for motor bus driver certificates and applicants who regularly transport
school age children or students under chapter 71B in the course of their job duties. The
department of public 1 telecommunications and cable and the department of public utilities shall
not disseminate such information for any purpose other than to further the protection of
children.

(9) The department of children and families and the department of youth services may obtain
from the department data permitted under section 172B.

(10) A person providing services in a home or community-based setting for any elderly person or
disabled person or who will have direct or indirect contact with such elderly or disabled person
or access to such person's files may obtain from the department data permitted under section
172C.

(11) The IV-D agency as set forth in chapter 119A may obtain from the department data
permitted under section 172D and section 14 of chapter 119A.

(12) A long-term care facility, as defined in section 72W of chapter 111, an assisted living
residence as defined in section 1 of chapter 19D, and any continuing care facility as defined in
section 1 of chapter 40D may obtain from the department data permitted under section 172E.

(13) The department of early education and care and adoption and foster placement agencies
licensed by the department may obtain from the department data permitted under section 172F.

(14) Operators of camps for children may obtain from the department data permitted under
section 172G.

(15) An entity or organization primarily engaged in providing activities or programs to children 18
years of age or younger that accepts volunteers may obtain from the department data permitted
under section 172H.

(16) School committees or superintendents that have contracted with taxicab companies to
provide for the transportation of pupils pursuant to section 7A of chapter 71 may obtain from the
department data permitted under section 172I.

(17) The commissioner of banks may obtain from the department data permitted under section
172J, section 3 of chapter 255E and section 3 of chapter 255F.

(18) A children's camp or school that plans to employ a person or accept a volunteer for a
climbing wall or challenge course program may obtain from the department data permitted
under section 172K.

(19) A victim of a crime, a witness or a family member of a homicide victim, as defined in section
1 of chapter 258B, may obtain from the department data permitted under section 178A.

(20) The motor vehicle insurance merit rating board may obtain from the department data
permitted under section 57A of chapter 6C.

(21) The department of early education and care, or its designee, may obtain from the
department data permitted under sections 6 and 8 of chapter 15D.

(22) The district attorney may obtain from the department data permitted under section 2A of
chapter 38.

(23) A school committee and superintendent of any city, town or regional school district and the
principal, by whatever title the position be known, of a public or accredited private school of any
city, town or regional school district, may obtain from the department data permitted under
section 38R of chapter 71.

(24) The Massachusetts Port Authority may obtain from the department data permitted under
section 61 of chapter 90.

(25) The department of children and families may obtain from the department data permitted
under section 26A of chapter 119, section 3B of chapter 210.

(26) The state racing commission may obtain from the department data permitted under section
9A of chapter 128A.

(27) A court, office of jury commissioner, and the clerk of court or assistant clerk may obtain
from the department data permitted under section 33 of chapter 234A.

(28) The pension fraud unit within the public employee retirement administration commission
may obtain from the department data permitted under section 1 of chapter 338 of the acts of
1990.

(29) Special education school programs approved under chapter 71B may obtain from the
department all criminal offender record information provided for in paragraph (3) of subsection
(a).

(30) The department shall configure the database to allow for the exchange, dissemination,
distribution and direct connection of the criminal record information system to criminal record
information systems in other states and relevant federal agencies including the Federal Bureau
of Investigation and Immigration and Customs Enforcement that utilize fingerprint or iris
scanning and similar databases.

(31) Navigator organizations certified by the commonwealth health insurance connector
authority under 42 U.S.C. § 18031(i) may obtain from the department data permitted under
section 172L.

(31) A person licensed pursuant to section 122 of chapter 140 may obtain from the department
data permitted under section 172L.

(32) A person licensed pursuant to section 122 of chapter 140 may obtain from the department
data permitted under section 172M.

(33) The department of public utilities and its departments or divisions may obtain from the
department all available criminal offender record information, as defined in section 167, to
determine the suitability of an applicant to obtain a transportation network driver certificate
pursuant to chapter 159A 1/2. Information obtained pursuant to this section shall not be
disseminated for any purpose other than to further public protection and safety.

(b) Notwithstanding the foregoing, convictions for murder, voluntary manslaughter, involuntary
manslaughter, and sex offenses as defined in section 178C of chapter 6 that are punishable by a
term of incarceration in state prison shall remain in the database permanently and shall be
available to all requestors listed in paragraphs (1) through (3), inclusive, of subsection (a) unless
sealed under section 100A of chapter 276.

(c) The department shall specify the information that a requestor shall provide to query the
database, including, but not limited to, the subject's name, date of birth and the last 4 digits of
the subject's social security number; provided, however, that a member of the public accessing
information under paragraph (4) of subsection (a) shall not be required to provide the last four
digits of the subject's social security number. To obtain criminal offender record information
concerning a subject pursuant to subsection (a)(2) or (a)(3), the requestor must certify under
the penalties of perjury that the requestor is an authorized designee of a qualifying entity, that
the request is for a purpose authorized under subsection (a)(2) or (a)(3), and that the subject
has signed an acknowledgement form authorizing the requestor to obtain the subject's criminal
offender record information. The requestor must also certify that he has verified the identity of
the subject by reviewing a form of government-issued identification. Each requestor shall
maintain acknowledgement forms for a period of 1 year from the date the request is submitted.
Such forms shall be subject to audit by the department. The department may establish rules or
regulations imposing other requirements or affirmative obligations upon requestors as a
condition of obtaining access to the database; provided, however, that such additional rules and
regulations are not in conflict with the state and federal Fair Credit Reporting Acts.

In connection with any decision regarding employment, volunteer opportunities, housing or
professional licensing, a person in possession of an applicant's criminal offender record
information shall provide the applicant with the criminal history record in the person's
possession, whether obtained from the department or any other source, (a) prior to questioning
the applicant about his criminal history and (b) if the person makes a decision adverse to the
applicant on the basis of his criminal history; provided, however, that if the person has provided
the applicant with a copy of his criminal offender record information prior to questioning the
person is not required to provide the information a second time in connection with an adverse
decision based on this information. Failure to provide such criminal history information to the
individual in accordance with this section may subject the offending person to investigation,
hearing and sanctions by the board.

(d) Except as authorized by this section, it shall be unlawful to request or require a person to
provide a copy of his criminal offender record information. Violation of this subsection is
punishable by the penalties set forth in section 178.

(e) No employer or person relying on volunteers shall be liable for negligent hiring practices by
reason of relying solely on criminal offender record information received from the department
and not performing additional criminal history background checks, unless required to do so by
law; provided, however, that the employer made an employment decision within 90 days of
obtaining the criminal offender record information and maintained and followed policies and
procedures for verification of the subject's identifying information consistent with the
requirements set forth in this section and in the department's regulations.

No employer shall be liable for discriminatory employment practices for the failure to hire a
person on the basis of criminal offender record information that contains erroneous information
requested and received from the department, if the employer would not have been liable if the
information had been accurate; provided, however, that the employer made an employment
decision within 90 days of obtaining the criminal offender record information and maintained and
followed policies and procedures for verification of the individual's information consistent with
the requirements set forth in this section and the department's regulations.

Neither the board nor the department shall be liable in any civil or criminal action by reason of
any criminal offender record information or self-audit log that is disseminated by the board,
including any information that is false, inaccurate or incorrect because it was erroneously
entered by the court or the office of the commissioner of probation.

(f) A requestor shall not disseminate criminal offender record information except upon request
by a subject; provided, however, that a requestor may share criminal offender record information
with individuals within the requesting entity that have a need to know the contents of the
criminal offender record information to serve the purpose for which the information was
obtained; and provided further, that upon request, a requestor shall share criminal offender
record information with the government entities charged with overseeing, supervising, or
regulating them. A requestor shall maintain a secondary dissemination log for a period of one
year following the dissemination of a subject's criminal offender record information. The log shall
include the following information: (i) name of subject; (ii) date of birth of the subject; (iii) date of
the dissemination; (iv) name of person to whom it was disseminated; and (v) the purpose for the
dissemination. The secondary dissemination log shall be subject to audit by the department.

Unless otherwise provided by law or court order, a requestor shall not maintain a copy, electronic
or otherwise, of requested criminal offender record information obtained from the department
for more than 7 years from the last date of employment, volunteer service or residency or from
the date of the final decision of the requestor regarding the subject.

(g) The department shall maintain a log of all queries that shall indicate the name of the
requestor, the name of the subject, the date of the query, and the certified purpose of the query.
A self-audit may be requested for no fee once every 90 days. The commissioner may impose a
fee in an amount as determined by the secretary of public safety and security, for self-audit
requests made more than once every 90 days. Upon request, the commissioner may transmit
the self-audit electronically. Further, if funding is available and technology reasonably allows, the
department shall establish a mechanism that will notify a subject, or an advocate or agent
designated by the subject, by electronic mail or other communication mechanism whenever a
query is made regarding the subject. The self-audit log and query log shall not be considered a
public record.

(h) Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the motor vehicle insurance merit rating
board may disseminate information concerning convictions of automobile law violations as
defined in section 1 of chapter 90C, or information concerning a charge of operating a motor
vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor that results in assignment to a driver
alcohol program as described in section 24D of chapter 90, directly or indirectly, to an insurance
company doing motor vehicle insurance business within the commonwealth, or to such
insurance company's agents, independent contractors or policyholders to be used exclusively
for motor vehicle insurance purposes.
(i) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, information indicating custody status
and placement within the correction system shall be available to any person upon request;
provided, however that no information shall be disclosed that identifies family members, friends,
medical or psychological history, or any other personal information unless such information is
directly relevant to such release or custody placement decision, and no information shall be
provided if its release would violate any other provisions of state or federal law.

(j) The parole board, subject to sections 130 and 154 of chapter 127, the department of
correction, a county correctional authority or a probation officer with the approval of a justice of
the appropriate division of the trial court may, in its discretion, make available a summary, which
may include references to criminal offender record information or evaluative information,
concerning a decision to release an individual on a permanent or temporary basis, to deny such
release, or to change the individual's custody status.

(k) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section or any other general or special law to the
contrary, members of the public who are in fear of an offender may obtain from the department
advance notification of the temporary or permanent release of an offender from custody,
including but not limited to expiration of a sentence, furlough, parole, work release or
educational release. An individual seeking access to advance notification shall verify by a written
declaration under the penalties of perjury that the individual is in fear of the offender and that
advance notification is warranted for physical safety reasons.

(l) Any individual or entity that receives or obtains criminal offender record information from any
source in violation of sections 168 through 175 of this chapter, whether directly or through an
intermediary, shall not collect, store, disseminate, or use such criminal offender record
information in any manner or for any purpose.

(m) Notwithstanding this section or chapter 66A, the following shall be public records: (1) police
daily logs, arrest registers, or other similar records compiled chronologically; (2) chronologically
maintained court records of public judicial proceedings; (3) published records of public court or
administrative proceedings, and of public judicial administrative or legislative proceedings; and
(4) decisions of the parole board as provided in section 130 of chapter 127.

(n) The commissioner, upon the advice of the board, shall promulgate rules and regulations to
carry out the provisions of this section.

(o) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section or any other general or special law to the
contrary, all gaming service employees shall be required to register with the investigations and
enforcement bureau established in section 6 of chapter 23K but the Massachusetts gaming
commission may, in its discretion, exempt certain gaming service employees by job position
from the registration requirement. The commission and the bureau may require a gaming service
employee to produce any information deemed necessary.

1 So in enrolled bill; probably should read “department of telecommunications and cable”.


   Previous Part of Code                      Next Part of Code 

 Back to Chapter List



                                                                                               
    Cite this article: FindLaw.com - Massachusetts General Laws Part I. Administration        Copy

    of the Government (Ch. 1-182) Ch. 6, § 172 - last updated January 01, 2025 |
    https://codes.findlaw.com/ma/part-i-administration-of-the-government-ch-1-
    182/ma-gen-laws-ch-6-sect-172/




FindLaw Codes may not reflect the most recent version of the law in your jurisdiction. Please
verify the status of the code you are researching with the state legislature before relying on it for
your legal needs.



Was this helpful?             Yes                No




  Search all Massachusetts Codes

  Keyword or Citation (Required)




    View Results 
Welcome to FindLaw's Cases & Codes
A free source of state and federal court opinions, state laws, and the United
States Code. For more information about the legal concepts addressed by
these cases and statutes, visit FindLaw’s Learn About the Law.




                         Go to Learn About the Law 




        Did FindLaw Help You Understand This Legal Issue?
                        Make It a Preferred Google Search Source



                                     Add to Google




Latest Blog Posts


 Third Circuit Rejects Fair Use Defense in Landmark AI Legal Research Copyright Case

 Florida Asks Court to Put Temporary Limits on OpenAI and ChatGPT
  Florida Asks Court to Put Temporary Limits on OpenAI and ChatGPT

  Romantasy Novel Drama Has Nothing on This Copyright Infringement Lawsuit

  Supreme Court Lets Trump’s Voter Database Keep Running for Now

  Explore all




 For Legal Professionals


  Practice Management

  Corporate Counsel

  Legal Technology

  Law Students




                           Learn About The Law
                         Get help with your legal needs

FindLaw’s Learn About the Law features thousands of informational articles to help
 you understand your options. And if you’re ready to hire an attorney, find one in
                              your area who can help.



                         Go to Learn About the Law 
   Need to Find an Attorney?
   Search our directory by legal issue

   Enter information in one or both fields (Required)


   Legal Issue




   City, ZIP Code or County

      Dubai, Dubai                                                




                                            Find a Lawyer 




                                               BACK TO TOP



                                            ABOUT US         



                                            FIND A LAWYER    
                             

                                            SELF-HELP
FOLLOW US:                                                   
                                            RESOURCES


                                            LEGAL RESEARCH    



                                            LEGAL NETWORK     
                        Questions?

                        At FindLaw.com, we pride
                        ourselves on being the
                        number one source of free

Copyright © 2026,       legal information and

FindLaw. All rights     resources on the web.

reserved.               Contact us.

Terms > | Privacy > |


                        Stay up-to-date with
Disclaimer > |          how the law affects
                        your life. Sign up for our
                        consumer newsletter.
Cookies > |
                        ENTER YOUR EMAIL
                        ADDRESS (Required)

Manage Preferences >
                                                 

---- END TEXT ----
