SOURCE: https://law.justia.com/codes/california/code-bpc/division-7/part-2/chapter-2/article-2/section-16729/ (mirror; official: https://leginfo.legislature.ca.gov/faces/codes_displaySection.xhtml?lawCode=BPC&sectionNum=16729)
RETRIEVED: 2026-10-04 (saved by Hamza from his browser; single page)
CAPTURED_VIA: manual download, converted with pdftotext
SOURCE_TYPE: secondary mirror of statute
NOTE: History note: Added by Stats. 2025, Ch. 338, Sec. 1. (AB 325) Effective January 1, 2026.

  Go to Other Versions of The California Code



2025 California Code
Business and Professions Code -
BPC
DIVISION 7 - GENERAL BUSINESS
REGULATIONS
PART 2 - PRESERVATION AND
REGULATION OF COMPETITION
CHAPTER 2 - Combinations in
Restraint of Trade
ARTICLE 2 - Prohibited Restraints
on Competition
Section 16729.
Universal Citation:
CA Bus & Prof Code § 16729 (2025)


  Previous


16729. (a) It shall be unlawful for a person to use or distribute a common pricing
algorithm as part of a contract, combination in the form of a trust, or conspiracy to
restrain trade or commerce in violation of this chapter.
(b) It shall be unlawful for a person to use or distribute a common pricing
algorithm if the person coerces another person to set or adopt a recommended
price or commercial term recommended by the common pricing algorithm for the
same or similar products or services in the jurisdiction of this state.

(c) Nothing in this section shall impair or limit the applicability of antitrust laws.

(d) For purposes of this section, the following definitions apply:

(1) “Antitrust laws” means the provisions of this part.

(2) “Commercial term” includes, without limitation, any of the following:

(A) Level of service.

(B) Availability.

(C) Output, including quantities of products produced or distributed or the
amount or level of service provided.

(3) “Common pricing algorithm” means any methodology, including a computer,
software, or other technology, used by two or more persons, that uses competitor
data to recommend, align, stabilize, set, or otherwise influence a price or
commercial term.

(4) “Distribute,” “distribution,” and “distributing” include selling, licensing,
providing access to, or otherwise making available by any means, including
through a subscription or the sale of a service.

(5) “Person” has the same meaning as defined in Section 16702 and does not
include the end consumer of a product or service.

(6) “Price” means the amount of money or other thing of value, whether tangible
or not, expected, required, or given in payment for any product or service,
including compensation paid to an employee or independent contractor for
services provided.

(Added by Stats. 2025, Ch. 338, Sec. 1. (AB 325) Effective January 1, 2026.)


  Previous
